
### Motivation

Leaf builds on a broad body of [research](bibliography.md) in quantum programming languages. Our goal is to make it a practical language designed for users to write easily and safely useful quantum programs that will run on today's and tomorrow's quantum processor.

### Starting point:

Leaf is deliberately designed to replicate Rust’s basic syntax, with minimal extensions for quantum programming which are meant to look and feel like Rust. It follows Rust’s philosophy of strong static type support and extends it to [quantum data](defining-terms.md#what-is-quantum-data) and both unitary and non-unitary [quantum operations](defining-terms.md#what-are-quantum-operations).

More precisely, Leaf is intended to be a statically typed, sound, and safe language. This means that types are checked by the compiler before execution. The sound type system ensures that well-typed programs come with formal guarantees that they behave according to the language’s semantics, without undefined behaviors, type-related execution errors, or attempts to perform non-physical quantum operations, enjoying ancilla qubits management and automatic uncomputation support. Safety ensures that bad runtime behaviors are ruled out by the type system or, where necessary, by runtime checks.

### The compilation lifecycle of Leaf code:

1. Frontend - Rust-like surface syntax.
2. Type checker - provides strong type safety for quantum programming with optional automatic uncomputation support.
3. First compiler pass - translation of the surface syntax to a typed, small core, high-level IR based on quantum lambda calculus.
4. Second compiler pass - translates high level IR code to an intermediate IR implemented as an Idris2 DSL.
5. Third compiler pass - serialization of Idris2 DSL to a low-level IR backend target:
   - OpenQASM3 for now. 
   - QIR to be added later.

### Leaf will provide strong formal verification support:

- Type safety is ensured by a strong static type system at both the surface-syntax level and the typed high-level IR, with rigorous coverage of quantum operations and their physical constraints.
- The developer will have the tools to test the semantic correctness of their program by writing Lean proofs at the level of the high-level IR representation of the quantum algorithm.
- The quantum gates & quantum circuit oriented Idris DSL intermediate IR representation provides additional support for Lean verification of unitary fragments of quantum code.  
- The Idris2 DSL does not enforce a full typing discipline, but it is equipped with correctness guarantees expressed using Idris2’s dependent type system and builtin-in proof support, ensuring that qubit indices used in gate applications are valid, control qubits are distinct from target qubits, and all control/target qubits are pairwise distinct when multiple qubits are involved.
- Correctness of language lowering: the translations to the Idris DSL and subsequently to OpenQASM3/QIR should preserve the semantics of the high-level IR (denotational semantics preservation).
- An attempt will be made to track entanglement at the level of type system using pre & post-condition function annotations. When a condition cannot be checked statically a Lean proof obligation will be generated by the compiler.
  