
### Quantum Contracts

These are Rust style functions clauses that specify pre- & post-conditions that the quantum data should satisfy. This is an attempt track entanglement at the level of type system, and obviously it can only be achieved only within some limits, otherwise we would not need a quantum computer at all. When a condition cannot be checked statically a Lean proof obligation will be generated by the compiler:

```leaf
fn oracle(x: qubit, scratch: [qubit; 3])
  requires clean(scratch)
  ensures clean(scratch) {
    ...
  }
```

The following contracts are supported:

- clean() - these qubits/registers are all in $|0\rangle$ state and separated from the rest of qubits.
- basis() - each of these qubits/registers are in  either a $|0\rangle$ or a $|1\rangle$ state and separated from the rest of qubits.
- pminus() - each of these qubits/registers are in $|+\rangle$ or $|-\rangle$ state and separated from the rest of qubits.
- pure() - these qubits are independent of the rest of the program state (even if possibly entangled among them). Their evaluation is unaffected by other qubits measurement outcomes.
- sep() - all of these qubits are mutually separable, meaning their state is a product state.


Contract lattices where dirty is the most general state of qubit(s) that may be entangled with others qubit(s) in the program:

```leaf
             dirty
               |
              pure
             /    \
        basis      pminus
          |
        clean
```

and:

```leaf
   dirty
     |
    sep
```

Stabilizer contracts are not yet supported. These are useful because Clifford gates transform Pauli stabilizers into Pauli stabilizers. For example H(q) maps:

```leaf
 Z(q) -> X(q)
```

```leaf
requires stabilized(q, [ +Z(q) ])
H(q)
ensures  stabilized(q, [ +X(q) ])
```